DeFi
----------------------------------------------------------------
Introduction


DeFi: movement, aims at making a new financial system that is open to everyone & doesn't require trusting intermediaries
main bldg blocks of DeFi: smart contracts

makerDAO: one of the first projects that started DeFi movement
          allowed users to lock in ETH as collateral & generate DAI

parts of DeFi:
 lending & borrowing, stable coins, Dexes, derivatives, margin trading, insurance

lending & borrowing
	projects: makerDAO, compound, AAVE
stable coins (2 types)
	algorithmic: with use of smart contracts & incentives, value is pegged to a fiat currency (eg DAI)
	non-algorithmic: centralized, a company holds the equivalent of the value of stable coin as fiat currency (eg USDC, USDT)
decentralized exchanges
	allows exchanging crypto assets in completely decentralized & permissionless way, without giving up custody of the coins
	2 types of dexes:
	a. liquidity pool based (eg. uniswap)
	b. order book based (eg. loopring, idex)
derivatives
	contracts that derive their value from the performance of an underlying asset
	eg. project: synthetix - allows on-chain exposure to different assets
margin trading
	practice of using borrowed funds to increase a position in a certain asset
	projects: dy/dx, fulcrum
insurance
	guarantees of compensation in return of the payment of a premium
	eg. protection against smart contract failures, protection of deposits
	eg project: nexus mutual

the above parts can be combined together in multiple various ways

----------------------------------------------------------------
Yield Farming

yield farming: way of maximizing rate of return on capital, by leveraging different DeFi protocols
			   yield farmers try to chase the highest yield, by swtiching btw multiple different strategies
APY (Annulaised Percentage Yield): common way of expressing returns of various yield farming strategies

Three main components that make insane high returns possible on yield farming
	1. Liquidity mining
			liquidity mining is the process of distributing tokens to the users of a protocol
			creates additional incentives for yield farmers as token rewards are added on top of yield already being generated by protocol usage
			depending on the protocol, the incentive may be so high that farmers may be willing to lose on their initial capital just to gain reward tokens, that make the overall strategy highly profitable
	2. Leverage
			using borrowed money to increase the potential return of an investment
			farmers borrow coins by depositing some other coins as collateral. Then further use borrowed coins as collateral to borrow some other coins. Repeat this a few times. By doing so farmers generate greater returns on their initial capital
	3. Risk
			yield farming is high risk high reward 

Yield farming strategies: set of steps that aim at generating high yield on the capital. These steps involve atleast one of the following:
	1. Lending & borrowing
		eg. farmers can supply DAI/USDC to a lending platform & start getting returns on their capital. Liquidity mining & leverage can superchage that.
	2. Supplying capital to liquidity pools
		yield farmers can supply coins to one of the liquidity pools in protocols like uniswap & get rewarded with fees that are charged for swapping different tokens. Again liquidity mining can supercharge this.
	3. Staking LP (liquidity provider) tokens
		LP tokens: represent participation in a liquidity pool
		some protocols allow liquidity providers to stake their LP tokens
	strategies can be combined to maximise yield even further
	yield farming strategies can become obsolete very quickly

----------------------------------------------------------------
Liquidity Pools

Liquidity pools: In essence, are pools of tokens locked in a smart contract
				 used to facilitate trading by providing liquidity
				 extensively used by some of the dexes
bancor: one of the first projects that introduced liquidity pools, but were widely popularized by uniswap

Why liquidity pools are needed:
In traditional order book exchange, buyers(bidders) set max price they r willing to pay for an asset
and sellers set minimum price they r willing to sell their asset for
	1. If the both the set prices do not match, trading simply can not happen
	2. Also even if the price matches, it can happen that amount of coins offered by seller is less than what buyers want, trade will not happen in this case also
solution to above problem employed by order book exchanges: Market Makers
Market Makers: entities that facilitate trading by always willing to buy or sell an asset
	       by doing so they provide liquidity, users can always trade & don't have to wait for a counterparty to show up 
(MMs usually track the current price of an asset by constantly changing their prices, which results in huge number of orders(or order cancellations) being sent to an exchange)
Ethereum w/ 12-15 TPS & block time of 10-19 seconds is not viable for order book exchange because on-chain exchange will be:
slow, expensive(gas fee) & have bad UX, also MMs will go bankrupt by just updating their orders (gas fee)
Hence, liquidity pools are needed

Working of liquidity pools:
A simple liquidity pool contains two different types of tokens, & each pools creates a new market for that pair of tokens
When a new pool is created, the first liquidity provider(LP) sets the inital (relative) price of the two tokens. LP is incentivised to supply equal value(not amount) of both the tokens
(if the inital price of tokens in the pool diverges from the current global market price, it creates an instant arbitrage opportunity that can result in lost capital for the LP)
The concept of supplying tokens in a correct ratio remains same for all other LPs that are willing to add more funds to the pool later
When liquidity is supplied to a pool, the LP receives spcl tokens called LP tokens in proportion to how much liquidity they supplied to the pool
On a trade facilitated by the pool a fee of 0.3% is proportionally distributed amongst all the LP token holders
If LP wants to get their underlying liquidity back plus any accrued fee, they must burn their LP tokens
Automated Market Maker (AMM): each token swap that a liquidity pool facilitates results in price adjustment according to a deterministice pricing algorithm. This mechanism is also called AMM.
                              liquidity pools across different protocols may use slightly different algorithm
Basic liquidity pools used by uniswap use a Constant Product Market Maker algorithm
	makes sure that product of quantities of two supplied tokens always remain same
	i.e. x*y = k
	becoz of algo, pool can always provide liquidity no matter how large the trade is, algo asymptotically increases the price of the token as the desired quantity increases
No need to fuss on math in this section, main takeaway: ratio of tokens in the pool dictates the price
so if someone buys eth from dai-eth pool, they decrease supply of eth & increase supply of dai -> increase the price of eth & decrease the price of dai
how much the price moves depends on the size of the trade in proportion to the size of the pool, bigger the size of the pool in comparison to trade size, lesser the price impact (aka slippage) occurs
becoz larger liquidity pools creates less slippage and result in better trading experience, protocols like balancer started incentiving LPs with extra tokens for providing liquidity to certain pools

----------------------------------------------------------------
Impermanent Loss

Impermanent loss: temporary loss of funds accruing when providing liquidity.
				  Most commonly explained as the difference btw holding an asset vs. providing liquidity in that asset.
				  Is usually observed in standard liquidity pools where the liquidity provider has two provide both assets in the correct ratio & one of the asset is volatile in relation to the other.
				  Eg. uniswap DAI-ETH50/50 pool, if ETH goes up in value, the pool has to rely on external arbitrageurs continually ensuring that pool price reflects the real world price to maintain the same value of both tokens in the pool.
				  This leads to a situation where profit from the token that appreciated in value is taken away from the liquidity provider. At this point if LP decides to withdraw their liquidity, impremanent loss becomes permanent.

Example:
An LP provides liquidity to a DAI-ETH50/50 pool. To supply liquidity the LP has to provide the same value of both tokens to the pool.
Let's say LP provides liquidity as follows:
Coin	|	price	|	supplied	|	value
DAI			$1			10k				$10k
ETH			$500		20				$10k
After liquidity has been provided let's say the price of ETH goes up on an external venue (eg. coin base), and now coin base's ETH price if $550.
An arbitrageurs sees the price differene btw coin base and uniswap and sees that as an opportunity for arbitrage.
Uniswap uses a constant product AMM to maintain the correct ratio of tokens in the pool. So as more ETH is bought from the pool, the higher the price of ETH becomes.
Arbitrageur buys ETH from uniswap until there is no price discrepancy btw the price of the two exchanges.
By plugging the external price in a few formulas that can be derived from the constant product AMM formula, we see that the point where the price of ETH will be $550 is when there are 10,488.09DAI & 19.07ETH in the pool.
So arbitrageur is able to buy 0.93 ETH to achieve equilibrium in uniswap & coin base's ETH price costing 488.09 DAI & achieving an avg price of 524.83 DAI/ETH.
Bought ETH can be instantly sold for DAI or any other stable coin on an external venue at price of $550/ETH.
Arbitrageur just earned (511.5(i.e. 0.93*550) - 488.09) =  ~$25 (minus the trade fees on uniswap)
Now coming to our LP,
Before arbitrage LP had a total value of $10k(i.e. 10k DAI) + $10k(i.e. 20 ETH) = $20k
After arbitrage LP has $10,488.09(i.e. 10,488.09 DAI) + 19.07*$550(i.e. 19.07ETH) = $20976.59
If the LP simply held the asset without providing liquidity, LP wud have had: $10k(i.e. 10kDAI) + 20*$550(i.e. ETH) = $21k
LP wud have had $23.41 more if they just held their assets without providing liquidity. The $23.41 is LP's impermanent loss.
If at this point LP doesn't withdraw their liquidity and the price of ETH goes back to $500, the impermanent loss is cancelled back to zero.
On the other hand if LP decides to withdraw their liquidity, they wud realise a loss of $23.41 permanently.

Why do people provide liquidity then?
If the trade fees accrued > impermanent loss, then providing liquidity becomes profitable.
On top of that, a lot of liquidity pools provide a lot of additional incentives for LPs by offering liquidity mining programs i.e. LPs are rewarded with extra tokens for providing liquidity to certain pools.
The value of additional tokens in some cases can completely negate the value lost by impermanent loss making providing liquidity highly lucrative.

----------------------------------------------------------------
Lending and Borrowing

DeFi lending allows users to become lenders or borrowers in a completely decentralized or permissionless way while maintaining full custody over their coins.
DeFi lending is based on smart contracts that run on open blockchains.

Two major lending protocols available: AAVE and Compound
Both protocols work by creating money markets for particular tokens (such as ETH, DAI, USDC; each token has its own money market).
Users who want to become lenders supply their tokens to a particular money market & start receiving interest on their tokens according to the current supply APY.
Supplied tokens are sent to a smart contract & become available for other users to borrow.
In exchange for supplied tokens the smart contract issues other tokens that represent the supplied tokens + interest. These tokens are called CTokens in compound & ATokens in AAVE and they can be redeemed for the underlying tokens.

Important Note:
In DeFi pretty much all loans are over-collateralized. This means the user who wants to borrow funds has to supply tokens in the form of collateral that is worth more than the actual loan that they want to take.
So why wud a user simply not sell their tokens instead of taking a loan? => many reasons, e.g. users don't want to sell their tokens but they need funds to cover unexpected expenses.

There is a limit to the amount that can be borrowed. The amount that can be borrowed depends on 2 main factors:
1. How much funds are available to be borrowed at a particular market (usually not a problem in active markets, unless someone is trying to borrow a really big amount of tokens)
2. What is the Collateral Factor of supplied tokens. Collateral Factor determines how much can be borrowed based on the quality of the collateral.
   ETH for e.g. have a Collateral Factor of 75% on Compound. This means upto 75% of the value of supplied ETH can be used to borrow tokens.

If a user decides to borrow funds, the value of the borrowed amount must always stay lower than the value of their collateral times its collateral factor.
i.e. Value (of borrowed amount) < Value (of collateral) * Collateral Factor
If this condition holds there is no limit for how long the user can borrow funds for.
If the value of the collateral falls below the required collateral lvl, the user's collateral are liquidated in order for the protocol to repay the borrowed amount.

The interest that the lenders receive & the interest that the borrowers have to pay are determined by the ratio btw supply & borrow tokens in a particular market.
The interest that is paid by borrowers is the interest earned by lenders so the borrow APY is higher than the supply APY in a particular market.
The interest APYs are calculated per ethereum block, this means DeFi lending provides variable interest rates that can change quite dramatically depending on the lending & borrowing demands for a particular token.
Biggest difference btw compound and AAVE: both protocols offer variable supply/borrow APYs, AAVE also offers stable borrow APY
	                                      stable APY is fixed in a short term but it can change in the long term to accomodate changes in the supply demand ratio btw tokens.
										  on top of stable APYs, AAVE also offers flash loans where users can borrow funds with no upfront collateral for a short period of time (one ethereum transaction).

Example working of DeFi lending protocol:
Mechanics of Compound & CTokens:
A user deposits 10 ETH to compound.
In exchange for 10 ETH compound issues CETH.
Number of CETH tokens the user will receive depends on the current exchange rate for a particular market.
When a new market is created, the exchange rate btw CTokens and underlying tokens is set to 0.02 (arbitrary number), so each market starts at 0.02.
We can also assume that this exchange rate will only increase with each ethereum block.
If the user supplied 10 ETH when the market was just created, they wud have received 10/0.02 = 500 CETH.
Becuz the ETH market has been operating for a while we can assume that the exchange rate is already higher, lets say its 0.021.
This means the user wud receive around 10/0.021 = 476.19 CETH.
If the user decided to immediately redeem their ETH, they shud receive roughly the same amount as deposited (476.19 * 0.021 = ~10 ETH).
If the user decided to hold their CETH, with each ETH block, the exchange rate wud increase. The rate of the increase depends on the supply APY which depends on the ratio of supplied & borrowed capital.
Lets say that exchange rate from CETH to ETH increase by 2*10^-10 with each block.
Assuming the rate of increase stays the same, for a month we can calculate the interest that can be made during that time. If we have on avg 4 blocks/min, this gives us (2*10^-10) * 4 * 60 * 24 * 30 = 0.00003456.
So exchange rate after a month = 0.021 + 0.00003456 = 0.02103456. If the user redeems their ETH now, they wud receive 476.19 * 0.02103456 = ~10.0165 ETH.
So the user just made 0.0165 ETH in a month => ~0.16% return on their ETH.

AAVE uses a similar model with interest being accumulated with every single block. The main difference is that ATokens value is pegged to the underlying token with a 1:1 ratio.
The interest is distributed to AToken holders directly by continuously increasing their balance.
AToken holders can also decide to redirect their stream of interest payments to another ETH address.

In case of borrowing, users lock their CTokens or ATokens as collateral & borrow other tokens. Collateral earns interest but users can't redeem or transfer assets while they are being used as collateral.
The amount that can be borrowed depends on the Collateral Factor of the supplied assets.
There is also a smart contract that looks at all the collateral across user's account and calculates how much can be safely borrowed without getting liquidated immediately.
To determine the value of the collateral compound uses its own price feed that takes prices from several highly liquid exchanges, AAVE on the other hand relies on chain link & falls back to their own price feed if necessary.
If a user decides to repay the borrowed amount & unlock their collateral they wud also have to pay the accrued interest on their borrowed assets. The amount of interest is determined by the borrow APY & is also increased automatically with each ETH block.

Main risk in DeFi lending: Quickly changing APYs. For e.g. during last yield farming craze, the borrow APY on the BAT token went up to over 40%. This can cause unaware users who are not tracking compound interest rates daily to get liquidated by having to pay more than expected in the same period of time.
